Prepare to apply the tools of engineering to address complex environmental challenges.
Our BS in Earth and Environmental engineering program centers on engineering principles, math, and core sciences. Mastering this knowledge will ensure you can successfully model, analyze, and design environmental systems.
You’ll learn to see the practice of engineering in its broader context, gaining insights from disciplines like ethics and economics to equip you to navigate the socio-political landscapes where environmental decisions and policies are made.
This interdisciplinary approach trains you to create sustainable and scalable engineering solutions, advocate for environmental stewardship, and develop policies that balance human needs with ecological preservation. Through a combination of rigorous coursework, extensive laboratory experience, and collaborative design projects, you’ll graduate ready to advance to further studies or launch a career of impact.
Join a department full of active scholars publishing pioneering research in areas like energy-efficient desalination, resource recovery from waste materials, and AI-empowered climate modeling.
Our curriculum offers the perfect balance of theory and practice.
From the Art of Engineering course in your first semester to your year-long senior design project, you'll learn how to apply engineering principles to solve real-world problems.
Opportunities to support faculty with external research projects will complement your studies and expand your theoretical understanding of this diverse and far-reaching field.
Studying in NYC will exposure you to diverse urban and natural environments, offering a perfect living laboratory to engage with issues like urban pollution and coastal management. A hub for research and industry, the city is an ideal place to find internships and make connections for your future.
Engage in problem solving at the intersection of natural and engineered systems by applying technical skills to critical water, energy, minerals, and decarbonization challenges.
The BS in Earth and Environmental Engineering program is accredited by the Engineering Accreditation Commission of ABET, under the commission’s General Criteria and Program Criteria for Environmental Engineering and Similarly Named Engineering Programs.
ABET is a nonprofit organization that draws on industry experts to develop standards for education programs in science, computing, and engineering. Accreditation indicates that our program has met its rigorous standards for equipping engineering professionals for the field.
Our dedicated Assistant Director of Graduate Career Placement can provide you with expert advice both during your studies and after graduation. You’ll receive personalized career guidance, application support, tailored workshops, and access to exclusive job opportunities within the earth and environmental engineering sector and beyond.
With strong industry connections, we also facilitate networking events and internships that give you the experience and confidence to stand out in the competitive job market.
If you are interested in our department but want to major in another field, you can still minor in Earth and Environmental Engineering. Due to our broad and multidisciplinary scope, a number of our courses are already required across other engineering departments. As well as developing interdisciplinary knowledge, this structure will ensure your workload is manageable.
Our curriculum is rooted in basic math, sciences and liberal arts. With a diverse selection of interdisciplinary courses to choose from, you’ll be able to tailor your studies to reflect your interests and career goals. These fundamentals will train you to address the technical and socio-economic challenges related to environmental problems.
What we look for:
To graduate from our BS program you must complete:
To earn a minor in Earth and Environmental Engineering, you must complete:
What matters most to us is your ability to thrive at Columbia.
We offer plenty of financial options to support you through your journey with us. Learn more about the types of aid that are available.
Find out how you can earn a Liberal Arts degree at your current university and also a BS in Earth and Environmental Engineering from Columbia University.
With your multi-disciplinary training in earth and environmental engineering, you'll be well qualified to pursue careers in industry, government agencies, and organizations specializing in the environment and the provision of basic materials. As well as engineering, you can easily pivot into careers across law, policy, finance, consulting, and even medicine. Your training also provides a strong foundation for graduate studies, with many graduates advancing to MS and PhD programs across chemical, computer, climate, mechanical, materials, and environmental engineering.
Our graduates have found positions with employers including:
Image
Daniel Steingart | Image
Bolun Xu |
At Columbia, you don’t have to wait until you graduate to start making a contribution. There are lots of opportunities to gain hands-on experience through research projects and summer internships.
Our faculty-run laboratories always need students to support them with their cutting-edge research spanning across areas such as electrochemical energy, carbon capture, climate modeling, materials recycling, and more.
Student Research Opportunities
Considering launching a startup during your studies or after you graduate? Columbia Engineering Innovation, Design & Entrepreneurship team can help you develop the business acumen to successfully launch your venture.
The team offers specialist entrepreneurship courses, bootcamps, networking opportunities and spaces for prototyping and testing. They also organize competitions with opportunities to win seed funding. This community of talented professors, students and alumni will give you the network of support needed to achieve your entrepreneurial goals.
Entrepreneurship Opportunities
MS in Earth and Environmental Engineering
This MS program explores the most imminent challenges of our time - from sustainable energy and carbon management to safe and secure water and responsible resource management.
MS in Carbon Management
Master the mechanisms. technologies, and processes to sustainable resolve the global energy crisis.