Doctoral Qualifying Examination
The exam consists of a written exam covering a number of areas of Mechanical Engineering.
MOREEvery doctoral candidate in the Department of Mechanical Engineering is expected to attain a level of mastery in an area of mechanical engineering, and must therefore choose a field and take the most advanced courses offered in that field. Candidates are assigned a faculty adviser whose task is to help choose a program of courses, provide general advice on academic matters, and monitor academic performance. Candidates also choose a faculty member in the pertinent area of specialization to serve as their research adviser. This adviser helps select a research problem and supervises the research, writing, and defense of the dissertation.
Qualifying Exam: The exam consists of a written exam covering several areas of Mechanical Engineering. A candidate who fails the examination may be permitted to repeat it once in the following year. Typical Time of Completion: Two semesters after matriculation. The exam is given in May.
Master of Science (MS): Doctoral students are expected to either matriculate into the doctoral program with a master’s degree or earn one on course to their doctoral degree. Typical Time of Completion: Two to three semesters after matriculation.
Master of Philosophy (MPhil): Doctoral students should apply for the M.Phil. after completing the following requirements: passing the doctoral qualifying exam, accumulating six residence units, and earning 30 credits beyond the M.S. degree. M.Phil degrees are awarded thrice yearly—in October, February, and May. Students must submit an M.Phil. application by email to Mel Francis. Deadline dates for submitting the application may be found at https://gsas.columbia.edu/student-guide/dissertation/dissertation-dates-and-deadlines. Typical Time of Completion: Four semesters after MS.
Research Proposal: Doctoral students present a research proposal that identifies a specific problem to investigate to a three-person faculty committee. The committee considers whether the proposed problem is suitable for doctoral research, whether the plan of attack is well formulated and appropriate to the problem, and whether the student is adequately prepared. Typical Time of Completion: No later than six semesters after passing the Qualifying Exam.
As per GSAS guidelines, the research proposal shall be approved in writing by a committee of at least three faculty: at least two must be Columbia faculty named on the list of approved dissertation advisors from the student’s home department/program; a third can be from within the department, from another department at Columbia, or from outside the university (with GSAS permission).
Defense and Deposit of Dissertation: Doctoral students prepare and defend a dissertation to a five-person faculty committee consisting of at least three members from the Department of Mechanical Engineering and at least one member whose primary appointment is outside the department. Complete GSAS guidelines regarding the thesis committee can be found here. Students must submit a defense application by email to Mel Francis no later than two weeks before the scheduled defense. Dissertation Dates and Deadlines may be found at: https://gsas.columbia.edu/student-guide/dissertation/dissertation-dates-and-deadlines
Read about application requirements and apply online on the Graduate Student Affairs site.
Visit the Office of Graduate Student Affairs site to learn more about our academic policies and procedures for Doctoral programs.