Master's Programs Concentrations
The Master of Science program in Mechanical Engineering offers students great flexibility in tailoring their program to their specific interests and goals.
MOREThe Master of Science program in the Department of Mechanical Engineering at Columbia University offers students the opportunity to deepen their knowledge in the latest and most important topics in mechanical engineering.
Students can create a flexible program of study that is tailored to his or her interests and objectives, working closely with their faculty advisor to identify courses and research experiences that permits a seamless transition into the field of mechanical engineering.
Students may construct their own sequence of courses (referred to as the Standard Track), or choose courses from several suggested specialized elective concentrations, which currently include Biomechanics, Energy Systems, Micro/Nanoscale Engineering, and Robotics and Control.
In general, attainment of the degree requires two to three semesters of full-time study, although it may also be undertaken on a part-time basis over a correspondingly longer period. The recommended course plan for full-time* students is a three-semester plan, containing four courses in semester one, four courses in semester two, and two courses in semester three (referred to as the 4+4+2 plan).
*International students are allowed to register for less than full-time in the final (third) semester without jeopardizing their visa status.
The Master’s program is excellent preparation for admission to a U.S. mechanical engineering doctoral program.
To fulfill the requirements for a Master of Science in Mechanical Engineering, a student must complete 30 credits of coursework, consisting of no fewer than ten courses, with a GPA of at least 2.5/4.0. All courses must be at the graduate level, i.e. 4000-level or higher. The sequence of courses should show a clearly discernible specialization. Additionally, the courses taken must satisfy the following requirements:
When fulfilling the above requirements, please note the following restrictions:
*Courses with the following designations are considered Mechanical Engineering courses (MECE, MECS, MEBM, MECH, EEME, IEME, MEIE)
Learn more about the Master of Science in Mechanical Engineering program at Columbia University.
Read about application requirements and apply online on the Graduate Student Affairs site.
Visit the Office of Graduate Student Affairs site to learn more about our academic policies and procedures for Master of Science programs.
This collection of syllabi is provided for general reference only.
For the syllabus of any currently offered course, please check the course page on CourseWorks.
If there is any conflict between a syllabus in this booklet and that posted on Courseworks , the syllabus on CourseWorks will apply.