Lead the way towards a more sustainable future.
Our MS in Earth and Environmental Engineering explores the most imminent challenges of our time - from sustainable energy and carbon management to safe and secure water and responsible resource management. Through real-world examples, you will investigate and develop innovative engineering solutions to resolve complex environmental challenges. You'll be taught by field leaders who are actively engaged in industry and research alongside their teaching. Opportunities to support faculty with their research will help you gain valuable hands-on experience and broaden your understanding of this vital field.
With three elective specializations to choose from, you can tailor your studies to reflect your personal interests and career aspirations. Our full-time and part-time study options also enable you to balance your academic pursuits with your professional commitments.
Whether you’re already working in environmental management and development or are looking for a career pivot, this training will open the way to new opportunities in environmental impact.
Engage in research that drives real change and addresses global environmental challenges. You’ll have the chance to assist faculty with their research projects and gain firsthand insight into the vital role of earth and environmental engineering.
Join a department full of active scholars who are pioneering research in areas like energy-efficient desalination, resource recovery from waste materials, and AI-empowered climate modeling.
Don’t interrupt your career. We offer full-time and part-time options so you can fit your MS studies around your professional and personal commitments.
Focus your studies in one of three elective specializations including Sustainable Energy, Sustainable Mining and Materials, and Water Resources and Climate Risks. You also have the option to design your own elective specialization to reflect your personal interests and career goals.
Our dedicated Assistant Director of Graduate Career Placement can provide you with expert advice both during your studies and after graduation. You’ll receive personalized career guidance, application support, tailored workshops, and access to exclusive job opportunities within the earth and environmental engineering sector and beyond.
If you hold an appropriate bachelor’s degree in Engineering and already know you want to undertake a PhD, you can apply to our MS/PhD Track. You will be considered a doctoral student and will be eligible to receive equivalent funding. If you are not successful, you could still be offered a place on our MS program.
Explore, design and test energy technologies and infrastructure to address environmental and resource challenges.
Structure:
Learn how to develop innovative engineering solutions to ensure the sustainable use and transformation of the Earth’s resources.
Structure:
Tackle the urgent challenges of water quality management on this climate-focused elective specialization.
Structure:
You also have the option to design your own elective specialization in consultation with your supervisor. This enables you to focus your studies to reflect your individual research and career interests.
Mandatory requirements:
Optional requirements:
To graduate from our MS in Earth and Environmental Engineering program, you must complete:
Your academic plan of studies must be approved by the faculty by the second month of your first semester at Columbia.
What matters most to us is your ability to thrive at Columbia.
We offer plenty of financial options to support you through your journey with us. Learn more about the graduate funding opportunities available at Columbia, including fellowships, part-time academic positions, loans, and more.
The U.S. environmental industry comprises nearly 30,000 businesses with total revenues exceeding $150 billion. As a graduate, you’ll be well placed to pursue environmental and climate-facing careers in industry, government, start-ups, finance, and operations. Potential pathways for earth and environmental engineering graduates include:
Our alumni have found positions with top employers including:
The MS program is also an excellent springboard for further graduate studies. The curriculum allows you to take independent research in preparation for our doctoral program.
Image
Daniel Steingart | Image
Ngai Yin Yip | Image
Shaina Kelly |
At Columbia, you don’t have to wait until you graduate to start making a contribution. There are lots of opportunities to gain hands-on experience through research projects and summer internships.
Our faculty-run laboratories always need students to support them with their cutting-edge research spanning across areas such as electrochemical energy, carbon capture, climate modeling, materials recycling, and more.
See Student Research Opportunities
Considering launching a startup during your studies or after you graduate? Columbia Engineering Innovation, Design & Entrepreneurship team can help you develop the business acumen to successfully launch your venture.
The team offers specialist entrepreneurship courses, bootcamps, networking opportunities and spaces for prototyping and testing. They also organize competitions with opportunities to win seed funding.
MS in Carbon Management
Our MS in Carbon Management program equips future environmental engineers with the tools to balance carbon management and sustainable resource production.
PhD in Earth and Environmental Engineering
Our PhD opportunities enable you to work together with our leading faculty to solve some of the world’s most pressing environmental challenges.