Master the mechanisms, technologies, and processes to sustainably resolve the global energy crisis.
As global energy demand rises, managing carbon dioxide emissions and ensuring secure energy access are two of humanity's most pressing, interconnected challenges. We must find adaptable engineering solutions to address these issues while considering climate change, economic growth, and ecosystem stability.
Our MS in Carbon Management program equips future environmental engineers with the tools to balance carbon management and sustainable resource production. The multidisciplinary curriculum covers carbon capture, utilization, storage, low-carbon energy systems, and business and policy perspectives.
You'll explore natural and engineered carbon management processes across the Earth's carbon reservoirs, including the atmosphere, land, ocean, and subsurface. Hands-on assignments and team projects will deepen your understanding of physical-chemical mechanisms, life cycle assessments, and integrative solutions. Guided by world-leading faculty, you’ll engage in research and benefit from exposure to cutting-edge topics through guest speaker colloquiums. The program’s flexible structure allows you to tailor your studies to reflect your career goals.
This program will provide you with the engineering expertise and strategic vision needed to drive sustainable solutions that tackle the global energy crisis, cut carbon emissions, and ensure long-term ecological stability.
You will receive a Certificate in Carbon Management as well as an MS degree from the Department of Earth and Environmental Engineering.
You’ll undertake hands-on research and collaborate with faculty to help develop solutions and technologies that address multiscale carbon capture, conversion, utilization, and storage research.
The MS program is part of the Lenfest Center for Sustainable Energy. As well as access to pioneering research, you’ll have opportunities to attend specialist carbon management events held by the Center, including colloquiums, research conferences and guest lectures.
Our classes will teach you to critically examine challenging industrial problems and proposed solutions through the application of numerical, experimental, and theoretical frameworks.
You will be learning with peers from a wide range of disciplines, professional experiences, and geographic locations. This exposure will help you develop a broad and interdisciplinary understanding of carbon management and its extensive societal implications.
Our dedicated Assistant Director of Graduate Career Placement can provide you with expert advice both during your studies and after graduation. You’ll receive personalized career guidance, application support, tailored workshops, and access to exclusive job opportunities within the earth and environmental engineering sector and beyond.
The MS Carbon Management curriculum has been designed to reflect the core research areas of the Lenfest Center for Sustainable Energy. As well as core courses, you will choose a combination of elective courses to ensure your degree aligns with your career goals - whether that’s in industry or in preparation for further education.
To graduate from our MS Carbon Management program, you must complete:
Your academic plan of studies must be approved by the faculty by the second month of your first semester at Columbia.
What matters most to us is your ability to thrive at Columbia.
We offer plenty of financial options to support you through your journey with us. Learn more about the graduate funding opportunities available at Columbia, including fellowships, part-time academic positions, loans, and more.
As a Carbon Management graduate, you’ll be part of a new generation of engineering and geoscience professionals who are working together to address pressing carbon management challenges. You will be well-equipped to pursue careers in the energy industry, decarbonization and environmental consulting firms, technology startups, environmental and energy NGOs, as well as local, national, and international government agencies.
Our alumni have found positions with top employers including:
The MS program is also an excellent springboard for further graduate studies. The curriculum allows you to take independent research in preparation for our doctoral program.
Image
Shaina Kelly | Image
Ngai Yin Yip | Image
Daniel Steingart |
At Columbia, you don’t have to wait until you graduate to start making a contribution. There are lots of opportunities to gain hands-on experience through research projects and summer internships.
Our faculty-run laboratories always need students to support them with their cutting-edge research spanning across areas such as electrochemical energy, carbon capture, climate modeling, materials recycling, and more.
See Student Research Opportunities
Considering launching a startup during your studies or after you graduate? Columbia Engineering Innovation, Design & Entrepreneurship team can help you develop the business acumen to successfully launch your venture.
The team offers specialist entrepreneurship courses, bootcamps, networking opportunities and spaces for prototyping and testing. They also organize competitions with opportunities to win seed funding.
Dual MS in Climate and MS in Carbon Management
The Climate School offers interdisciplinary dual degree programs with the MS in Climate. Dual programs award two degrees in less time than pursuing the degrees separately.
PhD in Earth and Environmental Engineering
Our PhD opportunities enable you to work together with our leading faculty to solve some of the world’s most pressing environmental challenges.