Biomedical Engineering Program
The Biomedical Engineering program is accredited by the Engineering Accreditation Commission of ABET
MOREThe undergraduate biomedical engineering curriculum at Columbia is designed to provide broad knowledge of the physical and engineering sciences and their application to the solution of biological and medical problems.
The first two years provides a strong grounding in the physical and chemical sciences, engineering fundamentals, mathematics, and modern biology. The last two years of the undergraduate program provide substantial exposure to fundamentals in biomedical engineering with emphasis on the integration of principles of biomedical engineering, quantitative analysis of physiology, and experimental quantification and measurements of biomedical systems. The common core biomedical engineering curriculum provides a broad yet solid foundation in biomedical engineering.
The flexible choice of technical electives in the Department of Biomedical Engineering, other departments in the Engineering School, as well as in other departments in the arts and sciences allows students to broaden their biomedical engineering education to their individualized interests for a personalized curriculum. These qualities allow the faculty to prepare students for activity in all contemporary areas of biomedical engineering.
Graduates of the program are equipped for employment in the large industrial sector devoted to health care, which includes pharmaceuticals, medical devices, artificial organs, prosthetics and sensory aids, diagnostics, medical instrumentation, and medical imaging. Graduates also accept employment in oversight organizations (FDA, NIH, OSHA, and others), medical centers, and research institutes. They are prepared for graduate study in biomedical engineering and several related areas of engineering and the health sciences. Students can meet entrance requirements for graduate training in the various allied health professions. No more than three additional courses are required to satisfy entrance requirements for most U.S. medical schools.
All biomedical engineering students are expected to register for nontechnical electives, both those specifically required by the School of Engineering and Applied Science and those needed to meet the 27-point total of nontechnical electives required for graduation.
Graduates of the program are equipped for futures encompassing discovery, development, and deployment of solutions to improve human health. Industries in this area include pharmaceuticals, medical devices, artificial organs, prosthetics, sensory aids, diagnostics, medical instrumentation, and medical imaging. Students are also prepared for continued training in graduate and professional studies, pursuing advanced solutions in academic and patient care environments. Graduates of the Columbia BME program also influence public policy and education through careers with public organizations including the FDA, NIH, OSHA, and many more. Learn more.
Professor Lauren Heckelman
Chair of Undergraduate Studies
Email: [email protected]
Comprehensive details of undergraduate course requirements are available from the school's online bulletin.
This option is open to Columbia students already enrolled in the BS degree program, who have a Columbia GPA of no lower than 3.5. This option offers a quick and smooth transition to the MS degree program, with its well-known utility in professional training.
The Integrated BS/MS Program is open only to Columbia University juniors with a cumulative GPA of 3.40. After earning the BS degree, students are able to seamlessly proceed toward earning their MS degree. Merging the BS and MS programs allows Columbia students to earn the MS degree in a very flexible and efficient manner.
More information about admissions is available.