Applied Mathematics Doctoral Program
The Applied Mathematics PhD Program has a very strong track record in research and training. Placement of PhD students has been outstanding, with recent PhD students taking tenure-track/tenured faculty jobs at institutions such as Carnegie Mellon, Columbia, Drexel, Purdue, Tsinghua, UC Santa Cruz, Utah, Washington and alike, as well as private sector jobs in leading financial and high-tech companies.
PhD Program in Applied Mathematics
Doctoral students specialize in one applied mathemtics field.
- Applied and Computational Mathematics
- Atmospheric, oceanic, and earth physics
For more information, please see the Columbia Engineering Bulletin: Applied Mathematics (PhD, EngScD)
Degree Requirements Applied Mathematics
Students must complete the following requirements in order to earn a PhD in Applied Mathematics. Some specializations have specific course requirements for the doctorate; elective courses are determined in consultation with the program adviser. Successful completion of an approved 30-point program of study is required in addition to successful completion of a written qualifying examination taken after two semesters of graduate study. An oral examination, taken within one year after the written qualifying examination, and a thesis proposal examination, taken within two years after the written qualifying examination, are required of all doctoral candidates.
- MS Degree - 30 points course requirement before the PhD written qualifying exam, with a 3.0 Minimum GPA
unless a Master’s Degree from another institution has already been earned, in which case students receive 30 points and 2 Residence Units of advanced standing - Written Qualifying Examination
courses suggested for preparation for the written qualifying examination are listed in the qualifying examination memorandum - 30 points of courses and/or research (beyond MS) taken for a letter grade with minimum 3.0 GPA
can be fulfilled with additional graduate courses related to specialization as well as research points, but no more than 15 points of research can be applied to this 30 point requirement. - 6 Residence Units
one per semester not including summer, takes 3 years without MS or 2 years with MS - Oral Exam
usually Spring of 2nd year - Thesis proposal
usually Spring of 3rd year - Ethics requirements
online ethics course during Fall of 1st, year, attend departmental ethics seminar during Spring of 1st and 2nd years - Master of Philosophy Degree awarded
- Complete PhD Dissertation
- Successful Defense
Research
Learn more about research opportunities for Applied Mathematics students.
Advising
Have a question? Please feel free to contact our Student Services Coordinator or reach out to an Applied Mathematics First Year Doctoral Advisor (PhD track or PhD only).