TITLE: A Systems Approach to Knowledge Manageme
SUBJECT: Information & Knowledge Strat
INSTRUCTOR: Moses Adoko
DESCRIPTION: This course will equip students with skills and strategies on how to plan, design, develop and deploy knowledge management programs for different types of organizations as well as for different sectors of the global economy. A hallmark of the course’s approach is that students will learn the steps from planning to deployment from a systems standpoint, i.e., students will learn how to use systems engineering principles as an analytic and structured framework for designing and implementing knowledge management programs that are responsive to organizational needs. The course first provides an overview of the strategic value of institutional and project knowledge when properly managed, shared and applied, or leveraged to support decision making.  Next, a system’s view and analysis of knowledge management (KM) is introduced as critical to business success because of the strategic value of knowledge assets. The knowledge management “system” as used in this course comprises of all the organizational elements that go into formulating a knowledge management strategy and its related implementation programs. Such system is made up of a defined KM strategy, appropriate information technology (IT) tools, processes, teams and leadership engagements, implementation programs delivery, institutional learning, lessons learned, knowledge sharing and transfer methodologies. Further, students will learn how to conduct organizational KM needs assessment, define institutional KM drivers, strategy formulation and knowledge sharing protocols. Students will also acquire skills for developing robust knowledge management practices and programs that support business objectives, enable project success, and sustain improved organizational performance. Additionally, students will apply the structured KM design principles they learned to real-world organizational challenges and opportunities. Assignments comprise a combination of individual exercises, a group project, and a final exam. Pre-requisites/open to: There is no pre-requisite knowledge or specific competency required for taking this course, because the instruction will include knowledge management fundamentals as well as systems engineering basics. Open to SPS and SEAS; other students with instructor permission.