TITLE: Human Rights Law, Accountability & Gover
SUBJECT: Population & Family Health
INSTRUCTOR: Christian M De Vos
DESCRIPTION: The objective of this course is to provide students with an understanding of the sources and content of international human rights law including who the law protects (rights-holders), who it obligates (duty-bearers), and how human rights are enforced in law and practice. The course will situate the human rights regime within the broader corpus of international law to protect rights in different contexts, including international humanitarian law, international criminal law and international refugee law. Key challenges and contemporary debates in international human rights law will be explored, including the relationship and relative importance of civil and political rights versus economic, social and cultural rights, and the role of the law in holding non state actors accountable for human rights abuses, including corporations, armed groups and religious fundamentalists. The course will profile and discuss how the law has evolved and adapted over time to serve as a dynamic tool to protect individuals.  In so doing, we will explore the historical role of civil society in shaping and influencing the development of the law. The course will begin with an overview of the origins and sources of international human rights law and the political factors that shaped its content and that continue to feature in contemporary debates around human rights. Session two will introduce students to the key global and regional mechanisms that seek to enforce human rights in law and practice. Subsequent sessions will explore a limited number of rights in more detail including the right to life, looking at both its civil and political rights dimensions, as well as economic and social rights to food, health and adequate housing that are critical to living a life of dignity. The right to be free from torture and cruel and inhuman treatment will also be explored and situated in the context of contemporary debates around its application to the private sphere including healthcare settings.  The final two sessions will focus on the challenge of human rights protection in the context of conflict and displacement. Students will examine the international refugee regime as well as efforts that have been made to develop a framework to protect those who are internally displaced as a result of conflict. The final session will review basic concepts of international humanitarian law – who it protects and who it obligates – and also examine the increasingly important relationship between IHL and the evolving system of international criminal law, exploring challenges associated with implementation and the role of the ICRC and other humanitarian actors in conflict situations. The course will utilize a combination of lectures, case studies and group exercises, and will integrate presentations by practitioners who are involved in the protection of human rights. By the end of the course, students will have a clear understanding of the main human rights and duties in international law, as well as an ability to critically assess the role and limitations of the law in protecting the rights of individuals.