TITLE: Politics & Policy of Urban Sustainabilit
SUBJECT: Environmental Policy
INSTRUCTOR: Rohit T Aggarwala
DESCRIPTION: Instructor permission required. Join the waitlist in Vergil to request registration. This is a course for thoughtful people who wish to influence actual policy outcomes related to sustainability challenges in major cities. Its objective is not to provide a primer on urban sustainability solutions; this is readily available from textbooks and will change by the time you are in a position to act. Rather, the course’s objective is to prepare you for the kind of challenges that will face you as a policy practitioner in the field of urban sustainability. Cities are increasingly recognized as a key level of government for environmental and sustainability policy. As at all levels, politics and policy are intensely intertwined, and perhaps more so at the local level because the decisions involved often affect constituents directly and intimately --in their neighborhoods, in their homes, in their commutes. This reading-heavy colloquium explores the politics and the policy of urban sustainability from the perspective of someone who wishes to effect change. It culminates in a team project in which students act as a sustainability policy team in a mayoral (or equivalent) office in one of the world’s major cities. The course considers key components of the city itself, with the objective of understanding what shapes the city and its impact on the environment. It mainly uses case studies from the twentieth-century United States, paired with international readings to allow a comparison with other experiences. The focus on deep case studies allows the consideration of the situations, constraints, and political dynamics of specific situations. It is intended to provide students with the ability to recognize patterns in urban political and policy dynamics related to sustainability. These are paired with an overview of leading solutions and how the professor believes practitioners should evaluate them for their own cities. The course also prominently features in-class presentations and discussions of the students’ main project: a team-based memo making a specific recommendation to solve a problem in a specific major world city, which is presented twice, once for a diagnosis of the problem in a given city and a second time with a policy recommendation. This project is the major portion of the overall grade for the class, and is used to allow the students to wrestle with the challenge of turning ideas from past and present into successful urban sustainability policies that can get implemented in a political and institutional world. In order to cover issues in depth, this course is not exhaustive; several key issues are omitted here, and the challenges of cities of the Global South are not addressed systematically, but the course provides the background, awareness, and tools to address these problems as well.