TITLE: The Impact of Climate Change on Public H
SUBJECT: General Public Health
INSTRUCTOR: Lewis Ziska
DESCRIPTION: Fossil fuel burning and deforestation will continue to be human-derived sources of atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2). This increase in CO2 and other infra-red trapping gases is of consequence to human health—but for two reasons. The first is one you are all familiar with—climatic change—and the consequences from heat to air pollution, from water quality to migration. The second reason is that CO2 is the source of carbon for plants—and hence for all living things. And that increase, of and by itself, will also impact human health—directly (allergic dermatitis) and indirectly (human nutrition, medicine). All living things will be affected. How they will be affected, the nature of the changes, and finally, the ways and means that we can begin to address the consequences with respect to human health are the core of this course. Ways and means will not only refer to academic or scientific approaches, but a focus on communication. How we can begin to explain the science and the consequences, the uncertainties and the likely outcomes in a way that will illicit change. During this course, students will become knowledgeable about the science of anthropogenic climate change and the consequences as they relate to public health. They will develop practical skills and tools to address impacts in their future careers, including an overview of mitigation and adaptation. The course is designed to not only provide an overview of climate and health, but to foster and develop a means of how to begin to address solutions at different societal levels. Further, this course is designed to nurture a mindset of inquiry and group learning--to communicate those evaluations simply and understandably to a lay audience. The course is appropriate for students who are interested in global climate change and who wish to expand their general knowledge as to causes, outcomes, response and concerns as they relate to public health.